hey this is pressed Elle Walker here's a
slightly edited version of an email I
received I follow your YouTube channel
and you are great I've created a puzzle
you might like a cyclist ascends a long
climb at a constant speed of 18 km/h a
motorcycle rally starts one minute after
the cyclist every minute for the entire
day a motorcycle starts the same long
climb and goes until it reaches the end
of the climb which is the finishing line
for the motorcycles when the cyclist
reaches the top of the long climb he
arrives at the same time as a motorcycle
that is reaching the finishing line
the cyclist then turns around and
descends to the starting point of the
climb with double the speed of his
ascent the cyclist keeps track of when
motorcycles pass him by funny
coincidence the number of motorcycles
that overtook him on his ascent exactly
equals the number of motorcycles that
pass by him on his descent all
motorcycles have the same constant
average speed the question is what is
the speed of a motorcycle Alessio from
Italy at first it seems like this
problem is impossible to solve there
just doesn't seem to be enough
information and yet if you follow
through the calculations carefully you
will be able to solve this problem so
can you figure it out give this problem
a try and when you're ready keep
watching the video for a solution
so I'm actually going to present two
different ways to solve this problem and
I do encourage you to stick with the
video because the second method
involving geometry is a lot of fun I'll
first go through algebraic equations and
then I'll present a geometry
visualization so let's get started with
the algebra let's set up some notation
let's write T a to be the time the
cyclist takes in minutes for the ascent
we'll write VA for the speed of the
cyclist in kilometers per minute for the
ascent well write TD and VD for the
analogous variables for the cyclist
descent will also write TM and VM for
the motorcycles time and speed for the
climb will write s for the length of the
climb going from the bottom to the top
or the top to the bottom and we write n
to be the number of motorcycles
overtaking on the ascent or number of
motorcycles passed on the descent
so with that setup let's solve this
problem because time is equal to
distance divided by speed ta is equal to
s over VA and TM is equal to s over VM
when the cyclist reaches the top after
exactly TA minutes he reaches at the
same time as a motorcycle which started
at the bottom TM minutes prior hence the
last motorcycle to pass the cyclist on
the way up started the race at the
minute mark ta minus TM all motorcycles
starting before this time also passed
the cyclist so motorcycles leaving at
minute marks one two three and all the
way to TA minus TM all past the cyclist
so we can conclude n is equal to TA
minus T
now let's solve for a similar equation
for n on the decent during the descent
the cyclist will pass motorcycles for
two different cases the cyclist will
pass one all motorcycles that have
already started but not yet passed the
cyclist and to all motorcycles that
started the rally during the cyclists
descent so let's solve for each case for
the first case notice the cyclist has
taken ta minutes to ascend so ta
motorcycles started the rally during the
cyclist a cent but n of these which
equals ta minus TM have already passed
the cyclists so there will be ta minus
the quantity ta minus TM which
simplifies to be TM motorcycles that
have started but not yet passed the
cyclists now for case two we need to
consider the time of the descent this
will be equal to the length of the climb
divided by the speed of the descent now
the speed of the descent is given to be
twice the speed of the ascent so this
simplifies to be half the time of the
ascent so it will take the cyclists TD
which equals ta over two minutes to
descend
so exactly another ta over two
motorcycles will start the race because
a motorcycle starts the race every
single minute so we add up these two
cases to get n is equal to TM plus ta
over two so we now have two different
expressions for n and we need to set
them equal to each other so let's go
ahead and do that we can now solve this
equation for T m in terms of ta we get
the TM is equal to TA divided by four
in other words the motorcycle completes
the ascent in 1/4 the time it takes the
cyclist consequently we can solve that
the motorcycle speed is equal to four
times that of the cyclist speed on the
ascent therefore since the cyclist
ascends at 18 kilometers per hour the
motorcycle has a speed of 4 times 18
which is 72 kilometers per hour and like
magic we've solved for the answer
without knowing the exact number of
motorcycles and without knowing the
elevation of the climb so this is one
way to solve the problem but there's
another way that involves a geometry
visualization so let's plot as follows
we have time on the horizontal axis and
the elevation of the person on the climb
on the vertical axis so one graph will
be a linear graph to the top of the
climb for the cyclist ascent now the
remaining portion of the cyclists trip
will be the descent going back to the
zero elevation since the cyclist has
twice the descent speed the same
elevation is covered in half the time so
if the cyclist takes T minutes to ascend
the climb the cyclist takes T over two
minutes to descend so the total amount
of time will be three halves T now what
about the motorcycles well every minute
a motorcycle starts and goes to the top
of the climb we can visualize this as a
series of lines that start every single
minute and go to the top of the
elevation
each intersection of a green line and a
blue line is when the motorcycle passes
the cyclist we know that there are the
same number on the ascent as the descent
so there will be n lines for the ascent
equally spaced at one minute apart and
there will be n lines for the descent
equally spaced at one minute apart
putting this together we have that there
will be equal time to the left of this
line and an equal time to the right of
this line the motorcycle that reaches
exactly when the cyclist reaches the top
divides this graph into n minutes on the
left and n minutes on the right so this
line divides the graph into two
triangles of equal area because both
triangles have the same base of n and
the same height as the elevation of the
climb consequently since the entire base
is 3 halves T each base of these smaller
triangles will be half that length which
is 3/4 T so each of these lengths will
be 3t over 4 now recall that the cyclist
takes T minutes to reach the top and T
over 2 minutes to descend so we can use
these values to deduce the lengths
between when the motorcycle starts and
reaches the top so this particular
length will be T over 4 now how is this
useful to us well notice that the
motorcycle ascends the climb in T over 4
minutes while the cyclist does the same
ascent in a time of T so we can use
these times to deduce that the green
line has a slope that's four times as
large as the blue line therefore the
motorcycle speed is four times larger
than the cyclist speed on the ascent so
it is equal to four times 18 which
equals 72 kilometers per hour
so like magic we figured out the answer
geometrically what's also nice about
this geometric visualization is that it
also shows why the elevation doesn't
matter the shapes and slopes will scale
even if we change the elevation so
imagine we have an elevation that's
shorter well the entire graph is going
to scale and we're still gonna get the
same relative speed of the motorcycle to
the cycle so for any elevation the
Greenline slope is four times as large
as the blue line and the motorcycle
speed will be four times larger to be 72
kilometers per hour so I like this
method because it's a little bit easier
to see exactly what's going on and why
the elevation doesn't matter did you
figure it out thanks for watching this
video please subscribe to my channel I
make videos on math you can catch me on
my blog mind your decisions if you like
this video you can check out my books
which are linked in the video
description you can also support me on
patreon and you can catch you on social
media either at mind your decisions or
at pressure tell Walker